Genesis, chapters 13-18, from the Holy Bible, King James Version.
And Abram went up out of Egypt, he and his wife, and all that he had, and lot with him,
into the south. And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold. And he went
on his journeys from the south, even to Bethel, unto the place where his tent had been at
the beginning, between Bethel and Hiai, unto the place of the altar which he had made there
at the first, and there Abram called on the name of the Lord. And lot also which went
with Abram had flocks, and herds, and tents. And the land was not able to bear them that
they might dwell together, for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together.
And there was a strife between the herdsmen of Abram's cattle and the herdsmen of lot's cattle,
and the Canaanite and Perizzite then dwelled in the land. And Abram said unto lot,
Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdsmen and thy
herdsmen, for we be brethren. Is not the whole land before thee? Separate thyself, I pray thee,
from me. If thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right, or if thou depart
to the right hand, then I will go to the left. And lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all
the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered everywhere, before the Lord destroyed Sodom
and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto
Zohar. Then lot chose him all the plain of Jordan, and lot journeyed east, and they separated
themselves the one from the other. Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and lot dwelled in
the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent towards Sodom. But the men of Sodom were wicked
and sinners before the Lord exceedingly. And the Lord said unto Abram, after that lot
was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art,
northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward, for all the land which thou seest,
to thee will I give it, and to thy seed, for ever. And I will make thy seed as the dust
of the earth, so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed
also be numbered. Arise, walk through the land, in the length of it, and in the breadth
of it, for I will give it unto thee. Then Abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt
in the plain of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the Lord.
CHAPTER XIV And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel,
king of Shinar, Eriak, king of Alasar, Kederleomer, king of Elam, and Tidal, king of nations,
that these made war with Bira, king of Sodom, and with Bersha, king of Gomorrah, Shinab,
king of Adma, and Shemebr, king of Zeboyim, and the king of Bela, which is Zohar. All
these were joined together in the vale of Sidim, which is the salt sea. Twelve years
they served Kederleomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled. And in the fourteenth
year came Kederleomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Raphayims in
Ash-Tiroth-Kirneim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Imims in Shavakirithayim, and the
Horites in their Mount Seir, unto El-Piran, which is by the wilderness. And they returned
and came to Enmishpet, which is Kadesh, and smote all the country of the Amalekites and
also the Amorites that dwelt in Hazesan-Temar. And there went out the king of Sodom, and
the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Adma, and the king of Zeboyim, and the king of Bela,
the same is Zohar, and they joined battle with them in the vale of Sidim, with Kederleomer,
the king of Elam, and with Tidal, king of Nations, and Amreful, king of Shinar, and
king of Alesar, four kings with five. And the vale of Sidim was full of slime-pits,
and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled and fell there, and they that remained fled to
the mountain. And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah and all their victuals
and went their way. And they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom and his
goods, and departed. And there came one that had escaped and told Abram the Hebrew, for
he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshkol and brother of Anor, and
these were confederate with Abram. And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive,
he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, 318, and pursued them unto Dan.
And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and
pursued them unto Hobar, which is on the left hand of Damascus. And he brought back all
the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and
the people. And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter
of Kederleomer and of the kings that were with him, at the vale of Sheva, which is the
king's dale. And Melchizedek, king of Salem, brought forth bread and wine, and he was the
priest of the Most High God. And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the Most
High God, possessor of heaven and earth, and blessed be the Most High God, which hath delivered
thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of all. And the king of Sodom said
unto Abram, Give me the persons, and take the goods to thyself. And Abram said to the
king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto the Lord, the Most High God, the possessor
of heaven and earth, that I will not take from a thread even to a shoe-latchet, and
that I will not take anything that is thine, lest thou shouldst say, I have made Abram
rich. Save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men which went
with me, Anor, Eshkol, and Mamrie, let them take their portion.
CHAPTER XV After these things the word of the Lord came
unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding
great reward. And Abram said, Lord God, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go childless,
and the steward of my house is this Eleazar of Damascus? And Abram said, Behold, to me
thou hast given no seed, and lo, one born in my house is mine heir. And behold, the
word of the Lord came unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir, but he that shall
come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir. And he brought him forth abroad,
and said, Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars if thou be able to number them.
And he said unto him, So shall thy seed be. And he believed in the Lord, and he counted
it to him for righteousness. And he said unto him, I am the Lord that brought thee out of
oar of the Chaldees to give thee this land to inherit it. And he said, Lord God, whereby
shall I know that I shall inherit it? And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three
years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtle-dove,
and a young pigeon. And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and
laid each piece one against another, but the birds divided he not. And when the fowls came
down upon the carcasses, Abram drove them away. And when the sun was going down, a deep
sleep fell upon Abram, and lo, and horror of great darkness fell upon him. And he said
unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger and a land that is not
theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years. And also
that nation whom they shall serve will I judge, and afterward shall they come out with
great substance. And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace, thou shalt be buried in
a good old age. But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again, for the iniquity
of the Amorites is not yet full. And it came to pass that when the sun went down, and it
was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces.
In the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given
this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates, the Kenites,
and the Canisites, and the Cadmonites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the
Ephemes, and the Amorites, and the Caninites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.
CHAPTER XVI
Now Sarai, Abram's wife, bear him no children, and she had an handmaid, an Egyptian, whose
name was Hagar. And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the Lord hath restrained me from
bearing. I pray thee, go in unto my maid. It may be that I may obtain children by her.
And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai. And Sarai Abram's wife took Hagar her maid,
the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her
husband Abram to be his wife. And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived, and when
she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes. And Sarai said unto
Abram, My wrong be upon thee. I have given my maid into thy bosom, and when she saw that
she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes. The Lord judged between me and thee. But Abram
said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thy hand, due to her as it pleaseth thee. And
when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face. And the angel of the Lord found
her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to shore. And
he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou, and whither wilt thou go? And she said,
I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai. And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Return
to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands. And the angel of the Lord said
unto her, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.
And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Behold, thou art with child, and shalt bear a son,
and shalt call his name Ishmael, because the Lord hath heard thy affliction. And he will
be a wild man, his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him, and
he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren. And she called the name of the Lord
that spake unto her, Thou God, seest me. For she said, Have I also here looked after him
that seeth me? Wherefore the well was called Bir-Lehi-Roy. Behold, it is between Kadesh
and Bir-Ed. And Hagar bare Abram a son, and Abram called his son's name, which Hagar
bare, Ishmael. And Abram was fourscore and six years old when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram.
CHAPTER XVII And when Abram was ninety years old and nine,
the Lord appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God, walk before me,
and be thou perfect, and I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee
exceedingly. And Abram fell on his face, and God talked with him, saying, Ask for me, behold,
my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations. Neither shall thy
name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham, for a father of many nations
have I made thee. And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations out thee,
and kings shall come out of thee. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee
and thy seed after thee and their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto
thee, and to thy seed after thee. And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee,
the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession,
and I will be their God. And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore,
thou and thy seed after thee, in their generations. This is my covenant, which ye shall keep between
me and you and thy seed after thee. Every man-child among you shall be circumcised,
and ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the covenant
betwixt me and you. And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every
man-child in your generations, he that is born in the house or bought with money of
any stranger which is not of thy seed. He that is born in thy house and he that is bought
with thy money must needs be circumcised, and my covenant shall be in your flesh for
an everlasting covenant. And the uncircumcised man-child whose flesh of his foreskin is
not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people, he hath broken my covenant.
And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai,
but Sarah shall her name be. And I will bless her and give thee a son also of her, yea I
will bless her and she shall be a mother of nations, kings of people shall be of her.
Then Abraham fell upon his face and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a child be born
unto him that is an hundred years old, and shall Sarah that is ninety years old bear?
And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee. And God said, Sarah
thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed, and thou shalt call his name Isaac, and I will
establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him. And
as for Ishmael, I have heard thee, behold I have blessed him and will make him fruitful
and will multiply him exceedingly, twelve princes shall he beget, and that will make
a great nation. But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee
at this set time in the next year. And he left off talking with him, and God went up
from Abraham. And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house,
and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham's house, and
circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the self-same day as God had said unto him.
And Abraham was ninety years old and nine when he was circumcised in the flesh of his
foreskin. And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old when he was circumcised in the flesh
of his foreskin. In the self-same day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.
And all the men of his house, born in the house and bought with money of the stranger,
were circumcised with him.
Chapter 18 And the LORD appeared unto him in the plains
of Mamrie, and he sat in the tent-door in the heat of the day, and he lift up his eyes
and looked, and lo, three men stood by him. And when he saw them, he ran to meet them
from the tent-door, and bowed himself toward the ground, and said,
My LORD, if now I have found favour in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy
servant. Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves
under the tree, and I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your hearts. After
that ye shall pass on, for therefore are ye come to your servant. And they said,
So do as thou hast said.
And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly three measures
of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the hearth. And Abraham ran unto the herd,
and fetched a calf tender and good, and gave it unto a young man, and he hasted to dress
it. And he took butter and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it before them,
and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat. And they said unto him, Where is
Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold in the tent. And he said, I will certainly return
unto thee according to the time of life, and lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah
heard it in the tent-door which was behind him.
Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age, and it ceased to be with Sarah after
the manner of women. Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old
shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also? And the lord said unto Abraham, Wherefore
did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child which am old? Is anything too
hard for the lord? At the time appointed I will return unto thee according to the time
of life, and Sarah shall have a son.
Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not, for she was afraid. And he said, Nay, but
thou didst laugh.
And the men rose up from thence, and looked towards Sodom, and Abraham went with them
to bring them on the way. And the lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which
I do, seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations
of the earth shall be blessed in him? For I know him that he will command his children
and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the lord to do justice and
judgment, that the lord may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him.
And the lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin
is very grievous, I will go down now, and see what they have done altogether according
to the cry of it which has come unto me, and if not, I will know.
And the men turned their faces from thence, and went towards Sodom, but Abraham stood
yet before the lord. And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous
with the wicked? Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city. Wilt thou also
destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein? That be far from
this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as
the wicked, that be far from thee, shall not the judge of all the earth do right?
And the lord said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare
all the place for their sakes. And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken
upon me to speak unto the lord, which am but dust and ashes. Peradventure there shall
be lack five of the fifty righteous. Wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five?
And he said, If I find there forty and five, I will not destroy it. And he spake unto him
yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will
not do it for forty's sake. And he said unto him, O, let not the lord be angry, and I will
speak. Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do it
if I find thirty there. And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the
lord. Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy it
for twenty's sake. And he said, O, let not the lord be angry, and I will speak yet but
this once. Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy it
for ten's sake. And the lord went his way as soon as he had left communing with Abraham,
and Abraham returned unto his place.